May the well-being of all people be protected By the powerful and mighty leaders be with law and justice.
May the success be with all divinity and scholars, May all (samastāḥ) the worlds (lokāḥ) become (bhavantu) happy (sukhino).​Uninterrupted practice of discrimination (between real and unreal)is the means to liberation and the cessation of ignorance.​Everything that is in other’s control is painful. All that is in self-control is happiness. This is the definition of happiness and pain in short.​Just as a tender plant is easy to cut down, the same requires much more effort when fully grown. Likewise, any disease is manageable in the early stage; it becomes almost incurable when it grows.​The wise should learn to accept wisdom from anybody, even from a child.
Doesn’t the small night lamp light up things which the sun can not?​When the mind is in a stage of dullness, stimulate and awaken it. When the awakened mind thus becomes turbulent, calm it down. In the process, recognize the dirt that surfaced. When the mind reaches a state of equanimity, do not disturb it further.​What can you do in the fourth part of your life, when you have not gained knowledge in the first, money in the second, and merit in the third?​One should not regret what is past. One should only think of the present and future.​The night will pass, the dawn will arrive, the sun will rise, and the lotus shall bloom again; thought the bee stuck in the lotus bud,
oh, but, an elephant uprooted the lotus!​If the conscience feels guilty about an act,
the act is a sin (of Tamasa quality).​Nala is saying this to DamayantiAs is the mind, so is the speech; as is the speech so is the action.
Of the good people there is uniformity in mind, speech and action.​The mischievous use their education for conflict, money for intoxication, and power for oppressing others. Honest ones use it for knowledge, charity, and protecting others, respectively.​People of self-respect rather have death than
humiliation. Fire dies out but never turns cold.​People who are servants of desires are also servants of the whole world.
For those to whom desire is a servant, the whole world also is a servant.​Extreme yearning should be avoided without rejecting desire itself. One should steadily enjoy self-earned wealth in moderation.​On the onset of the rainy season, Cuckoo does not sing (but remains silent). Because when there are distressing noises (croaking of the frogs), it is better to be silent (not to degrade your talent).​A king who governs the whole earth may not satisfied. But a hermit is definitely content for whom a piece of stone and gold are equal.​Giving, taking, revealing secrets and hearing them, eating and feeding – these six are the signs of love.​The intelligence of a person who travels in different countries and associates with scholars expands, just as a drop of oil expands in water.​A wanderer (eventually) finds the path.​Earn with hundred hands and donate with thousand.​Yoga is restraining the mind-stuff (Chitta) from taking various forms (Vrttis).​Adornment of a horse is in his speed and that of an elephant in his majestic gait like a drunken person.
Women are adorned and appreciated for their skills and men for their industriousness and perseverance.For every action, there should be a counteraction, for every
blow a counterblow and by the same logic,
for every kiss a counter-kiss.There are five signs of a fool; vanity, wicked conversation, anger, stubborn arguments, and a lack of respect for other people’s opinions.You are unconditioned and changeless, formless and immovable, unfathomable awareness and unperturbable, so hold on to nothing but consciousness.So long as the breath is restrained in the body, so long as the mind is undisturbed, and so long as the gaze is fixed between the eyebrows, there is no fear from Death.Whose endeavors are preceded by a firm commitment, who does not take long rests before the task is accomplished, who does not waste time and who has control over his/her mind is wise.One whose task is never hindered by cold, heat, fear, love,
prosperity or lack of it, is really superior.A little bit for yourself and everything for others!This too shall pass.Whatever is seen among men (whether pleasure or pain) is born of Karma (actions). All creatures enjoy or suffer, as per their past actions.Even if a man has stead, clever, brave mind like the Meru mountain.
Greed can damage him like grass in a matter of moments.Great people never delay their duties.One who knows both, the material science as well as the spiritual science, transgresses fear of death by the former, i.e. by proper bodily and mental efforts, and attains salvation by the latter, i.e. by the purity of mind and soul.Do not be very upright in your dealings, as you would see in forest, the straight trees are cut down while the crooked ones are left standing.Consider again and again the followingHe who gives up what is imperishable for that which is perishable,
loses that which is imperishable; and doubtlessly loses that which is perishable also.Let not a single day pass without your learning a verse, half a verse, or a fourth of it, or even one letter of it; nor without attending to charity, study and other pious activity.At the time of the Pralaya (universal destruction) the oceans are to exceed their limits and seek to change, but a saintly man never changes.Though one be endowed with beauty and youth and born in noble families, yet without education they are like the Palasa flower which is void of sweet fragrance.As gold is tested in four ways by rubbing, cutting, heating and beating – so a man should be tested by these four thingsCharity puts end to poverty; righteous conduct to misery; discretion to ignorance; and scrutiny to fear.A man is born alone and dies alone; and he experiences the good and bad consequences of his karma alone; and he goes alone to hell or the Supreme abode.The earth is supported by the power of truth; it is the power of truth that makes the sun shine and the winds blow; indeed all things rest upon truth.Time perfects all living beings as well as kills them; it alone is awake when all others are asleep.
Time is insurmountable, rest upon truth.Anger is a personification of Yama (the demigod of death); Thirst is like the hellish river Vaitarani; Knowledge is like a Kamadhenu (the cow of plenty), and Contentment is like Nandanavana (the garden of Indra).He who thinks that the soul kills, and he who thinks of it as killed, are both ignorant. The soul kills not, nor is it killed.The soul is never born, it never dies having come into being once, it never ceases to be.
Unborn, eternal, abiding and primeval, it is not slain when the body is slain.As a man casts off worn-out garments and puts on others that are new,
so does the soul cast off its worn-out bodies and enter into others that are new.Weapons do not cleave the soul, fire does not burn it, waters do not wet it, and wind does not dry it.Death is certain for the born, and re-birth is certain for the dead; therefore you should not feel grief for what is inevitable.Holding pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat as alike, gird yourself up for the battle.
Thus, you shall not incur any sin.To work alone you have the right, and not to the fruits. Do not be impelled by the fruits of work.
Nor have attachment to inaction.By being established in Yoga, O Dhananjaya, undertake actions, casting off attachment
and remaining equipoised in success and failure. Equanimity is called Yoga.The wise, possessed of knowledge, having abandoned the fruits of their actions,
and being freed from the fetters of birth, go to the place which is beyond all evil.From anger there comes delusion; from delusion, the loss of memory; from the loss of memory,
the destruction of discrimination; and with the destruction of discrimination, he is lost.For the unsteady there is no wisdom, and there is no meditation for the unsteady man.
And for an un-meditated man, there is no peace. How can there be happiness for one without peace?That man attains peace who, abandoning all desires, moves about without longing,
without the sense of mine and without egoism.No man can attain freedom from activity by refraining from action; nor can he reach perfection by merely refusing to act.Therefore, do you perform your allotted duty; for action is superior to inaction. Desisting from action, you cannot even maintain your body.Man is bound by his own action except when it is performed for the sake of sacrifice.
Therefore, Arjuna, efficiently perform your duty, free from attachment, for the sake of sacrifice alone.Go on efficiently doing your duty at all times without attachment.
Doing work without attachment man attains the Supreme.In fact all actions are being performed by the modes of Prakruti (Primordial Nature).
The fool, whose mind is deluded by egoism, thinks: “I am the doer.”One’s own duty, though devoid of merit, is preferable to the duty of another well performed.
Even death in the performance of one’s own duty brings blessedness; another’s duty is fraught with fear.The senses are superior to the gross body, and superior to the senses is the mind.
Beyond the mind is the intellect, and even beyond the intellect is the soul.O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly tough to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by constant practice and by detachment.